---
layout: page-twocol
title: Standard Working Group
permalink: /badge-alliance/working-groups/standard/
navitems:
    - url: "../../../community"
      title: "&#8624; Back to Community"
    - url: "#top"
      title: "Top: Standard Working Group"
    - url: "#communication"
      title: Communication
    - url: "#cycle-1"
      title: "Cycle 1: 2014"
    - url: "#charter"
      title: "Charter"
    
---
Since 2014, this working group has focused on shaping the evolution of the Open Badge Specification. The goal of this group is move the specifications more toward a standard that’s clearer and easier to align with, maintain, and build from. In 2015, the Standard Working Group developed the v1.1 Open Badges Specification out of the findings generated by the 2014 cycle. 

In January 2017, the Standard Working Group will conclude its 2016 cycle and hand off responsibility for the Open Badges Specification to a new Open Badges Working Group within IMS Global. See [IMS Global Transition FAQ](https://www.imsglobal.org/open-badges-transition-faq).

**Chair/BA Liaison**: Nate Otto, Badge Alliance Director of Technology

<h2 class="title title-content" id="communication">Communications: Standard Working Group Discussions</h2>
Standard discussions have occurred on two Google Group mailing lists over the course of Open Badges history. Use the current official list for current standards discussion.

* **Official Mailing list**: 
[openbadges-dev](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/openbadges-dev)
* **Archive mailing list (2014-15)**: [ba-standard](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/ba-standard)

<h2 class="title title-content" id="the-specification">The Open Badges Specification</h2> 
The Standard Working Group is the official standards body for the [Open Badges Specification](http://openbadgespec.org/). After discussion, all proposals to modify the specification are taken to [the official Git repository](https://github.com/openbadges/openbadges-specification) as a pull request and made available for comment, review, and approval during BA Standard calls.

* [See current pull requests](https://github.com/openbadges/openbadges-specification/pulls)
* [See open issues](https://github.com/openbadges/openbadges-specification/issues)
* We also have a semi-official code-based discussion space for longer-term discussion topics. See issues & questions: [openbadges-discussion](https://github.com/openbadges/openbadges-discussion/issues). The Standard WG recommends cross-posting to the official mailimng list.


<h2 class="title title-content" id="cycle-1">1st Cycle Standard Working Group Resources and Deliverables, 2014</h2>
For the first cycle from April to December 2014, the Standard Working Group focused on coming up with the best technological solution for adding metadata extensions to the current Open Badges Specification and baking the full BadgeClass object into the Assertion. This entailed the following:

* Research and experiment with technology options for implementing extensions to BadgeClass and BadgeAssertion
* Propose an extension solution that’s opened up to the community to comment and experiment with and iterate on
* Standardize specifications with combination of JSON-LD schema and JSON-LD
* Work closely with the Endorsement Working Group and technology advisory council to assess impact of specification updates on larger technology stack
* Propose baking full BadgeClass object into BadgeAssertion as part of the specification, open up to community for comment, experimentation, and iteration
* Explore 3rd party standardization support from W3C

And the following deliverables:

* Several JSON-LD/JSON-LD schema sketch like prototypes.
  - Validator: [openbadges-jsonld-jsonschema-validator](https://github.com/kayaelle/openbadges-jsonld-jsonschema-validator) -- Starts with the Assertion, maps @context, validates that it's JSON-LD, expands JSON-LD - ./bin/parser.js
  - Badge Schemer: [badge-schemer](https://github.com/ottonomy/badge-schemer) -- Starts with an Assertion and a collection of schema and tries to see which schema matches which image
  - [openbadges-displayer.js](http://github.com/cmcavoy/openbadges-displayer.js): proof of concept to encourage badge baking and alternative ways to display open badges
* Presentation on JSON-LD prototype and Open Badges:
[Prezi](http://prezi.com/i50_fyhtstrk/json-ld-prototype/?utm_campaign=share&utm_medium=copy)

<h2 class="title title-content" id="charter">Badge Alliance Standard Working Group Charter</h2>
The Badge Alliance Standard Working Group is responsible for maintaining the collected standards that make up the Open Badges Infrastructure. This group has worked closely with other BA working groups (including Infrastructure and Endorsement) to translate features that emerge from those working groups into standards that are easy to build on and backwards compatible with existing standards.

<h3 class="title title-secondary">Guiding Principles</h3>
The guiding goal of the Open Badges Specification matches the goal of the Open Badges project, which is to get recognition for skills you learn anywhere. Open Badges empower learners to store and display their achievements on any Open Badges compliant platform or application. Maintaining the Open Badges Specification is the responsibility of the Open Badges community, guided by the Badge Alliance and its member organizations. The guiding technology principles is to keep the specification easy to understand, easy to implement, and focused on the ability of the learner to control his/her data.

<h3 class="title title-secondary">In Scope</h3>
The Standard Working Group is responsible for the 'objects' in the Open Badges Infrastructure. Examples include:

* BadgeClass
* Assertion
* Issuer Profile
* Badge baking

<h3 class="title title-secondary">Out of Scope</h3>
The BA Standard Working Group isn’t responsible for discussions of platforms and specific implementations that rely on the specification.

<h3 class="title title-secondary">Participation and Roles</h3>
Any individual or organization can participate in the BA Standard Working Group. The Badge Alliance appoints a working group chairperson and secretary, provides a BA liaison, and works with the chairperson to create a cabinet.

* **Chairperson**: The chairperson is responsible for organizing the group, scheduling meetings, leading discussions, and finding consensus in group decisions.
* **Secretary**:The secretary writes and distributes notes from group meetings.
* **BA Liaison**: The liaison works with the chairperson to fit the goals of the Standard Working Group into the larger goals of the Badge Alliance.

<h3 class="title title-secondary">Communication</h3>
Proposed changes to any standard that fall under the scope of the BA Standard Working Group should be posted publicly and circulated through the group mailing list. A page should be created under the proposals page and current status tracked there.

<h3 class="title title-secondary">Comments</h3>
Proposed changes to the Open Badges Specification will be presented by the proposer on the biweekly working group meeting. WG members in attendance are encouraged to ask questions and comment on the proposal in this meeting. The secretary will collect these comments and publish them to the working group mailing list. A method of providing comments outside the 'in-person' meeting will be arranged for each proposal.

<h3 class="title title-secondary">Investigation</h3>
In some cases, a proposal will be positively received, but need more detailed technical explanation. The chair and cabinet will appoint an investigation team to add necessary detail to the proposal.

<h3 class="title title-secondary">Iteration</h3>
To promote quality additions to the Open Badges Specification, features should be iterated on by proposers and WG members until consensus is reached in the full working group.

<h3 class="title title-secondary">Decision Policy</h3>
The Badge Alliance values consensus building over voting. The chair, BA liaison, and cabinet are responsible to the working group as consensus builders and determine the priority of proposal presentation and discussions.
